# University of Maryland College Park High School Admissions App
A repository for work on my final project in news apps: an interactive that displays applications and admissions to the University of Maryland - College Park from every high school in the state.

**Final Project Reflection and Debrief**

<em>Link to final project GitHub repository: https://github.com/hannahzziegler/umcp_hs_admissions_app </em>
* To run the app, open “app.py” and type “python3 app.py” at the command line prompt

Working on this news app tested me in a ton of ways, but I’m ultimately really proud of the project I was able to string together in the end and am mostly looking forward to being able to build off of the work I was able to get done ahead of this deadline. As a disclaimer before I get into the nitty gritty: I did receive high school admissions data from the University of Maryland with information on every country in the state across the last 10 years. As I felt more and more burnt out by working through a less intriguing theme for this project, I decided at the end of last week to pivot as much as I possibly could to incorporate a news app that showed high school admissions data and how different types of schools in the state fed or didn’t feed into its flagship institution.

My app is entirely run on codespaces right now. The basic functionality of my app includes a map that colors every single high school in the state of Maryland based on whether it is a public school or private school. When a person selects a point on the map, a tooltip pops up and provides information about applicants, admissions and acceptance rates for that school for the most recent and complete application cycle (so, in this particular case, 2022-23.) I wanted to have my news app have some sort of map as a centerpoint and this was the easiest way to implement that from a functionality standpoint, but I do definitely see myself pursuing choropleth maps in the future to provide more county-by-county comparison opportunities.

I think the most successful part of my news app is the search functionality that it allows users, which wasn’t initially even a consideration in my previous iterations of my draft news app ideas. I think I learned the most while doing the search functionality within this project. My app allows users to search for a specific Maryland high school and/or filter by an entire county to generate tables based on their search criteria that displays each school’s admissions data over time. Although there are many ways in which I’d like to improve the display and utility of these features in the future, I do think the table elements added a nice touch. I initially wanted to have every single school get reduced down to a line/bar graph that showed their application/admissions statistics over time, but found this task to be extremely difficult just because of how stringent so many of the stipulations within the data were. 

The qualifications in the data stipulated that a Maryland high school had to have 10 or more students who applied in a given academic year within the last 10 years to be included in the dataset I received back from my PIA request. If less than 10 students from that high school applied in a given academic year, their “applied” status is listed as “NA.” If a school met the qualifications for having more than 10 student applicants, but had less than 10 students admitted, this figure is noted in the database as "< less than 10" for the given academic year. Because of these limitations in the data, I had to take the pragmatic approach of tables to display the data just because every single column had strange qualifiers in the data and couldn’t really be reduced down to all integers or strings at any one time. This definitely proved to be one of the most difficult elements of tackling this project. I think if I had more time, I would have found a more creative way to display the search results that allow for more cross-school comparison, but for now, I think the tables work to show the data in with as much detail and accessibility as possible. 

Because of the time crunch, I think the current version of my app focuses much more on its role as an exploratory news app rather than one that points out trends and issues for the user to focus on and helps them get there. For example, one thing I just didn’t have time to get to in the last few days was getting overall aggregate bar graphs that show the top 10 schools in Maryland that have sent the most students to UMD over the last 10 years, the schools that had the most students apply and other visualization methods that would help the reader draw more succinct, clear conclusions than “oh cool! [x] people applied to UMD in the year I graduated high school!” However, I’m trying not to be too hard on myself because I do truly see myself building off of the first basic elements that I curated in this version of the news app and was able to pull off a relatively decent final product on a tight timeline.

A primary problem I had to overcome in this project was being able to add data within multiple different search options into the app for parsing. Allowing a user to search by two different categories and making sure they populate properly became a common ChatGPT-assisted problem, but I honestly think it turned out really cool looking in the code and each returned value is accurate to the base database we are working off of. I think I mainly ran into a lot of roadblocks because I’m not super familiar with utilizing Python/HTML translation language that involves the syntax such as “{% if search_term or county_filter %}, {% endif %}, {% for school, admissions in results %}.” I consider myself a for loop and conditional kind of girl. Though I know these are the same as doing a loop in HTML, it just felt like a big learning curve as I tried to tackle and try to understand yet another specificity associated with a coding language that does the same thing as “if, elif, else” statements in my more native Python. 

I also had a bit of trouble finding ways to work around the strange requirements around the data types associated with admitted and applied students present in the data. Because of the annoying data features I detailed above, it was very hard to workaround any navigation based on the numbers in each column because there were so many values that were either null or coded as characters within the dataframe. I consider my fixes to these issues to be band-aid solutions, as ChatGPT-assisted lines of code like “default_color = "#FFFFFF"  # Default color for missing values (NaN)”, “high_schools_colors[np.nan] = default_color” and others within the map really saved me when I was getting down to the wire and so much of that particular element’s functionality depended on having accurate representations of the numbers and strings within the database I had. 

Although I found this app extremely frustrating to work on for the majority of the time I was chipping away at it (primarily before I had data that I was super interested in and passionate about working with), I can honestly say I’m really excited to continue building out elements of this app in the future. There are a ton of ideas I have that, frankly, I just ran out of time to complete as we approach the end of the semester. These include things like the county comparison choropleth map I described earlier, as well as integrating more data that shows how many graduating seniors of an entire high school class applied to the University of Maryland. I have the data to be able to join things based on enrollment, but wanted to be able to match it with university yield data, which UMD so-politely chose to ignore my request for. I think it would add another huge element of intrigue in this app to know not only what the acceptance rate is for each school in the state, but also the application submission rate for different groups of high school seniors over time. That’s a key priority for me getting this app to be more functional.

Some small things that I’ll probably work on sooner rather than later also include making the colors correspond better to fit with the public/private school distinction on the main map that currently serves as a centerpiece of the app. I really want to make the color of each school name correspond to the color on the map that signifies whether they are public or private and integrate other color-related elements into the designs of the tables. I also know for certain that there are a ton of options for visualizing the table data in an interesting and non-deceiving way that I just didn’t get the chance to work my way through, so that’s also a short-term (summer!) goal that I have for the app. On that same note, something that would make my current app better is if the map was able to update to show only points for a specific school/county when a user files something in the search bar. This is another thing that seems simple enough and that I might even pursue on Thursday just so it doesn’t nag me, but once again, I had to prioritize what I could in the few days I gave myself to pivot my news app topic since getting my hands on this fresh dataset. Some stretch goals include integrating the same breakdowns for other USM schools (hello, summer PIAs!) and also integrating out of state school data, which was included in the data I received from my initial PIA, but I chose to scrap for time.

In the future, with these improvements and probably lots more functionality, such as having different pages that show the same data breakdown for high school admissions among every institution within the University System of Maryland, I hope to launch this app as an interactive with The Diamondback and help it allow people to explore the college admissions landscape for different high schools in the state. This app does stay true to my first final project update in terms of its refresh schedule. The bulk of the work comes from getting the initial launch ready to go, as cleaning, pivoting and organizing 10 years’ worth of data to get an app up and running is a much taller task than updating that same data with just one additional year once new statistics are available. The update process for this app each year will likely have to be wholesale based on the PIA request of the newest iteration of data, a fair bit of cleaning and pivoting to get it into a useable format and then adjusting some of the templates to make sure they are accessing the most recent year of data within the app. I see the update process for the app being relatively similar to The Diamondback salary guide’s wholesale update that usually just takes a few days a year to really get off the ground. 

This data definitely does outlive this app and bot, as there are endless points of interest where folks want to know how public/private schools in the state stack up against one another in their competitiveness for UMD spots – especially as the school becomes more and more “competitive” with their switch to the Common App and test optional policy. I don’t really see a logical sunset date for an app like this, as there will be parents, high schoolers and university stakeholders alike who will have vested interest in the information it conveys into perpetuity just because of how hot of an issue university admissions have become in recent years. 
